@example
msgattrib [@var{option}] [@var{inputfile}]
@end example

The @code{msgattrib} program filters the messages of a translation catalog
according to their attributes, and manipulates the attributes.

@subsection Input file location

@table @samp
@item @var{inputfile}
Input PO file.

@item -D @var{directory}
@itemx --directory=@var{directory}
Add @var{directory} to the list of directories.  Source files are
searched relative to this list of directories.  The resulting @file{.po}
file will be written relative to the current directory, though.

@end table

If no @var{inputfile} is given or if it is @samp{-}, standard input is read.

@subsection Output file location

@table @samp
@item -o @var{file}
@itemx --output-file=@var{file}
Write output to specified file.

@end table

The results are written to standard output if no output file is specified
or if it is @samp{-}.

@subsection Message selection

@table @samp
@item --translated
Keep translated messages, remove untranslated messages.

@item --untranslated
Keep untranslated messages, remove translated messages.

@item --no-fuzzy
Remove `fuzzy' marked messages.

@item --only-fuzzy
Keep `fuzzy' marked messages, remove all other messsages.

@item --no-obsolete
Remove obsolete #~ messages.

@item --only-obsolete
Keep obsolete #~ messages, remove all other messages.

@end table

@subsection Attribute manipulation

Attributes are modified after the message selection/removal has been
performed.

@table @samp
@item --set-fuzzy
Set all messages `fuzzy'.

@item --clear-fuzzy
Set all messages non-`fuzzy'.

@item --set-obsolete
Set all messages obsolete.

@item --clear-obsolete
Set all messages non-obsolete.

@item --fuzzy
Synonym for @samp{--only-fuzzy --clear-fuzzy}: It keeps only the fuzzy
messages and removes their `fuzzy' mark.

@item --obsolete
Synonym for @samp{--only-obsolete --clear-obsolete}: It keeps only the
obsolete messages and makes them non-obsolete.

@end table

@subsection Output details

@c --no-escape and --escape omitted on purpose.  They are not useful.

@table @samp
@item --force-po
Always write an output file even if it contains no message.

@item -i
@itemx --indent
Write the .po file using indented style.

@item --no-location
Do not write @samp{#: @var{filename}:@var{line}} lines.

@item -n
@itemx --add-location
Generate @samp{#: @var{filename}:@var{line}} lines (default).

@item --strict
Write out a strict Uniforum conforming PO file.  Note that this
Uniforum format should be avoided because it doesn't support the
GNU extensions.

@item -w @var{number}
@itemx --width=@var{number}
Set the output page width.  Long strings in the output files will be
split across multiple lines in order to ensure that each line's width
(= number of screen columns) is less or equal to the given @var{number}.

@item -s
@itemx --sort-output
Generate sorted output.  Note that using this option makes it much harder
for the translator to understand each message's context.

@item -F
@itemx --sort-by-file
Sort output by file location.

@end table

@subsection Informative output

@table @samp
@item -h
@itemx --help
Display this help and exit.

@item -V
@itemx --version
Output version information and exit.

@end table
