@example
msgfilter [@var{option}] @var{filter} [@var{filter-option}]
@end example

The @code{msgfilter} program applies a filter to all translations of a
translation catalog.

@subsection Input file location

@table @samp
@item -i @var{inputfile}
@itemx --input=@var{inputfile}
Input PO file.

@item -D @var{directory}
@itemx --directory=@var{directory}
Add @var{directory} to the list of directories.  Source files are
searched relative to this list of directories.  The resulting @file{.po}
file will be written relative to the current directory, though.

@end table

If no @var{inputfile} is given or if it is @samp{-}, standard input is read.

@subsection Output file location

@table @samp
@item -o @var{file}
@itemx --output-file=@var{file}
Write output to specified file.

@end table

The results are written to standard output if no output file is specified
or if it is @samp{-}.

@subsection The filter

The @var{filter} can be any program that reads a translation from standard
input and writes a modified translation to standard output.  A frequently
used filter is @samp{sed}.

Note: It is your responsibility to ensure that the @var{filter} can cope
with input encoded in the translation catalog's encoding.  If the
@var{filter} wants input in a particular encoding, you can in a first step
convert the translation catalog to that encoding using the @samp{msgconv}
program, before invoking @samp{msgfilter}.  If the @var{filter} wants input
in the locale's encoding, but you want to avoid the locale's encoding, then
you can first convert the translation catalog to UTF-8 using the
@samp{msgconv} program and then make @samp{msgfilter} work in an UTF-8
locale, by using the @code{LC_ALL} environment variable.

Note: Most translations in a translation catalog don't end with a newline
character. For this reason, it is important that the @var{filter}
recognizes its last input line even if it ends without a newline, and that
it doesn't add an undesired trailing newline at the end. The @samp{sed}
program on some platforms is known to ignore the last line of input if it
is not terminated with a newline. You can use GNU @code{sed} instead; it
does not have this limitation.

@subsection Useful @var{filter-option}s when the @var{filter} is @samp{sed}

@table @samp
@item -e @var{script}
@itemx --expression=@var{script}
Add @var{script} to the commands to be executed.

@item -f @var{scriptfile}
@itemx --file=@var{scriptfile}
Add the contents of @var{scriptfile} to the commands to be executed.

@item -n
@itemx --quiet
@itemx --silent
Suppress automatic printing of pattern space.

@end table

@subsection Output details

@c --no-escape and --escape omitted on purpose.  They are not useful.

@table @samp
@item --force-po
Always write an output file even if it contains no message.

@item --indent
Write the .po file using indented style.

@item --keep-header
Keep the header entry, i.e. the message with @samp{msgid ""}, unmodified,
instead of filtering it.  By default, the header entry is subject to
filtering like any other message.

@item --no-location
Do not write @samp{#: @var{filename}:@var{line}} lines.

@item --add-location
Generate @samp{#: @var{filename}:@var{line}} lines (default).

@item --strict
Write out a strict Uniforum conforming PO file.  Note that this
Uniforum format should be avoided because it doesn't support the
GNU extensions.

@item -w @var{number}
@itemx --width=@var{number}
Set the output page width.  Long strings in the output files will be
split across multiple lines in order to ensure that each line's width
(= number of screen columns) is less or equal to the given @var{number}.

@item -s
@itemx --sort-output
Generate sorted output.  Note that using this option makes it much harder
for the translator to understand each message's context.

@item -F
@itemx --sort-by-file
Sort output by file location.

@end table

@subsection Informative output

@table @samp
@item -h
@itemx --help
Display this help and exit.

@item -V
@itemx --version
Output version information and exit.

@end table
