@example
msgunfmt [@var{option}] [@var{file}]...
@end example

The @code{msgunfmt} program converts a binary message catalog to a
Uniforum style .po file.

@subsection Operation mode

@table @samp
@item -j
@itemx --java
Java mode: generate a Java @code{ResourceBundle} class.

@end table

@subsection Input file location

@table @samp
@item @var{file} @dots{}
Input .mo files.

@end table

If no input @var{file} is given or if it is @samp{-}, standard input is read.

@subsection Input file location in Java mode

@table @samp
@item -r @var{resource}
@itemx --resource=@var{resource}
Specify the resource name.

@item -l @var{locale}
@itemx --locale=@var{locale}
Specify the locale name, either a language specification of the form @var{ll}
or a combined language and country specification of the form @var{ll_CC}.

@end table

The class name is determined by appending the locale name to the resource name,
separated with an underscore.  The class is located using the @code{CLASSPATH}.

@subsection Output file location

@table @samp
@item -o @var{file}
@itemx --output-file=@var{file}
Write output to specified file.

@end table

The results are written to standard output if no output file is specified
or if it is @samp{-}.

@subsection Output details

@c --no-escape and --escape omitted on purpose.  They are not useful.

@table @samp
@item --force-po
Always write an output file even if it contains no message.

@item -i
@itemx --indent
Write the .po file using indented style.

@item --strict
Write out a strict Uniforum conforming PO file.  Note that this
Uniforum format should be avoided because it doesn't support the
GNU extensions.

@item -w @var{number}
@itemx --width=@var{number}
Set the output page width.  Long strings in the output files will be
split across multiple lines in order to ensure that each line's width
(= number of screen columns) is less or equal to the given @var{number}.

@item -s
@itemx --sort-output
Generate sorted output.  Note that using this option makes it much harder
for the translator to understand each message's context.

@end table

@subsection Informative output

@table @samp
@item -h
@itemx --help
Display this help and exit.

@item -V
@itemx --version
Output version information and exit.

@item -v
@itemx --verbose
Increase verbosity level.

@end table
